6.824 2017 Lecture 2: Infrastructure: RPC and threads

Most commonly-asked question: Why Go?
  6.824 used to use C++
    students spent time fixing bugs unrelated to distributed systems
      e.g., they freed objects that were still in use
  Go allows you to concentrate on distributed systems problems
    type safe
    garbage-collected (no use after freeing problems)
    good support for concurrency
    good support for RPC
  We like programming in Go
    simple language to learn
  After the tutorial, use https://golang.org/doc/effective_go.html

Threads
  threads are a useful structuring tool
  Go calls them goroutines; everyone else calls them threads
  they can be tricky

Why are threads?
  Allow you to exploit concurrency, which shows up naturally in distributed systems
  I/O concurrency:
    While waiting for a response from another server, process next request
  Multicore:
    While working on one request on one core, process another one on an idle core
  Both show up in the crawler exercise

Thread = "thread of execution"
  threads allow one program to (logically) execute many things at once
  the threads share memory
  each thread includes some per-thread state:
    program counter, registers, stack

How many threads in a program?
  As many as "useful" for the application
  Go encourages you to create many threads
    Typically more threads than cores
    The Go runtime schedules them on the available cores
  Go threads are not free, but you should think as if they are
    Creating a thread is more expensive than a method call
    
Threading challenges:
  sharing data 
     two threads modify the same variable at same time?
     one thread reads data that another thread is changing?
     these problems are often called races
     need to protect invariants on shared data
     use Go sync.Mutex
  coordination between threads
    e.g. wait for all Map threads to finish
    use Go channels or WaitGroup
  deadlock 
     thread 1 is waiting for thread 2
     thread 2 is waiting for thread 1
     easy detectable (unlike races)
  lock granularity
     coarse-grained -> simple, but little concurrency/parallelism
     fine-grained -> more concurrency, more races and deadlocks
  
Crawler exercise
  Two opportunities for parallelism:
    While fetching an URL, work on another URL
    Work on different URLs on different cores
  Challenge: fetch each URL once
    want to avoid wasting network bandwidth
    want to be nice to remote servers
    => Need to some way of keeping track which URLs visited 
    
Solutions
  Sequential one: pass fetched two recursive calls
    Doesn't overlap I/O when fetcher takes a long time
    Doesn't exploit multiple cores
  Solution with a go routines and shared fetched
    Create a thread for each url
      What happens we don't pass u?  (race)
    Why locks?  (remove them and every appears to works!)
      What can go wrong without locks?
        Checking and marking of url isn't atomic
	So it can happen that we fetch the same url twice.
	T1 checks fetched[url], T2 checks fetched[url]
	Both see that url hasn't been fetched
	Both return false and both fetch
      This called a race condition
        The bug shows up only with some thread interleavings
	Hard to find, hard to reason about
      Go can detect races for you (go run -race crawler.go)
    How can we can decide we are done with processing a page?
      waitGroup
  Solution with channels instead of WaitGroup
    Channels: general-purse mechanism to coordinate threads
      bounded-buffer of messages
      several threads can send and receive on channel
        (Go runtime uses locks internally)
    Sending or receiving can block
      when channel is full
      when channel is empty
  Solution with only channels
    Dispatch every url through a filter thread
    Termination using a separate channel

What is the best solution?
  All concurrent ones are substantial more difficult than serial one
  Some Go designers argue avoid shared-memory
    I.e. Use channels only
  My lab solutions use many concurrency features
    locks for shared-memory data structures
    channels for coordination
    WaitGroup for determining threads are done
  Use Go's race detector:
    https://golang.org/doc/articles/race_detector.html
    go test -race mypkg

Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
  a key piece of distributed system machinery; all the labs use RPC
  goal: easy-to-program network communication
    hides most details of client/server communication
    client call is much like ordinary procedure call
    server handlers are much like ordinary procedures
  RPC is widely used!

RPC ideally makes net communication look just like fn call:
  Client:
    z = fn(x, y)
  Server:
    fn(x, y) {
      compute
      return z
    }
  RPC aims for this level of transparency

Go example: kv.go
  Client "dials" server and invokes Call()
    Call similar to a regular function call
  Server handles each request in a separate thread
    Concurrency!  Thus, locks for keyvalue.

RPC message diagram:
  Client             Server
    request--->
       <---response

Software structure
  client app         handlers
    stubs           dispatcher
   RPC lib           RPC lib
     net  ------------ net
 
A few details:
  Which server function (handler) to call?
    In Go specified in Call()
  Marshalling: format data into packets
    Tricky for arrays, pointers, objects, &c
    Go's RPC library is pretty powerful!
    some things you cannot pass: e.g., channels, functions
  Binding: how does client know who to talk to?
    Maybe client supplies server host name
    Maybe a name service maps service names to best server host

RPC problem: what to do about failures?
  e.g. lost packet, broken network, slow server, crashed server

What does a failure look like to the client RPC library?
  Client never sees a response from the server
  Client does *not* know if the server saw the request!
    Maybe server/net failed just before sending reply
  [diagram of lost reply]

Simplest scheme: "at least once" behavior
  RPC library waits for response for a while
  If none arrives, re-send the request
  Do this a few times
  Still no response -- return an error to the application

Q: is "at least once" easy for applications to cope with?

Simple problem w/ at least once:
  client sends "deduct $10 from bank account"

Q: what can go wrong with this client program?
  Put("k", 10) -- an RPC to set key's value in a DB server
  Put("k", 20) -- client then does a 2nd Put to same key
  [diagram, timeout, re-send, original arrives very late]

Q: is at-least-once ever OK?
  yes: if it's OK to repeat operations, e.g. read-only op
  yes: if application has its own plan for coping w/ duplicates
    which you will need for Lab 1

Better RPC behavior: "at most once"
  idea: server RPC code detects duplicate requests
    returns previous reply instead of re-running handler
  Q: how to detect a duplicate request?
  client includes unique ID (XID) with each request
    uses same XID for re-send
  server:
    if seen[xid]:
      r = old[xid]
    else
      r = handler()
      old[xid] = r
      seen[xid] = true

some at-most-once complexities
  this will come up in labs 3 and on
  how to ensure XID is unique?
    big random number?
    combine unique client ID (ip address?) with sequence #?
  server must eventually discard info about old RPCs
    when is discard safe?
    idea:
      unique client IDs
      per-client RPC sequence numbers
      client includes "seen all replies <= X" with every RPC
      much like TCP sequence #s and acks
    or only allow client one outstanding RPC at a time
      arrival of seq+1 allows server to discard all <= seq
    or client agrees to keep retrying for < 5 minutes
      server discards after 5+ minutes
  how to handle dup req while original is still executing?
    server doesn't know reply yet; don't want to run twice
    idea: "pending" flag per executing RPC; wait or ignore

What if an at-most-once server crashes and re-starts?
  if at-most-once duplicate info in memory, server will forget
    and accept duplicate requests after re-start
  maybe it should write the duplicate info to disk?
  maybe replica server should also replicate duplicate info?

What about "exactly once"?
  at-most-once plus unbounded retries plus fault-tolerant service
  Lab 3

Go RPC is "at-most-once"
  open TCP connection
  write request to TCP connection
  TCP may retransmit, but server's TCP will filter out duplicates
  no retry in Go code (i.e. will NOT create 2nd TCP connection)
  Go RPC code returns an error if it doesn't get a reply
    perhaps after a timeout (from TCP)
    perhaps server didn't see request
    perhaps server processed request but server/net failed before reply came back

Go RPC's at-most-once isn't enough for Lab 1
  it only applies to a single RPC call
  if worker doesn't respond, the master re-send to it to another worker
    but original worker may have not failed, and is working on it too
  Go RPC can't detect this kind of duplicate
    No problem in lab 1, which handles at application level
    Lab 3 will explicitly detect duplicates
